docs/graph_rag_presentation.md, before:

---
marp: true
theme: default
paginate: true
class: lead
backgroundColor: '#ffffff'
---

# Fraud Detection: Business Problem & Graph RAG Technical Solution

_A short presentation for students — business context, architecture, and why we used a Graph-based RAG approach._

---

## Agenda

- Business problem: payments fraud at scale
- Challenges with traditional ML approaches
- Why a graph + RAG architecture?
- System architecture (components)
- Demo & results (what we measured)
- How to reproduce / run locally
- Discussion and references

---

## Business problem

- Large-scale transaction systems see fraudulent rings, collusion and shared devices.
- Fraud is multi-relational: users, devices, transactions, accounts, locations.
- Stakes: monetary loss, regulatory risk, customer trust.
- Requirements:
  - High recall on fraud rings
  - Interpretable signals for investigations
  - Fast inference for operational scoring and batch analysis

---

## Why standard ML alone is insufficient

- Tabular models capture per-entity features but often miss relations (device reuse, rings).
- Graph structure captures relational signals (shared devices, common neighbors, communities).
- Pure graph algorithms (community detection, centrality) are powerful but limited for natural language context and ad-hoc reasoning.

---

## What is RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation)?

- RAG combines a retriever (finds relevant facts) with a generator (answers/augments using those facts).
- In our context:
  - Retriever: graph queries that return relevant subgraphs or neighbor context for an entity/transaction.
  - Generator: an LLM (or rules engine) that consumes the retrieved graph context to produce human-friendly explanations, hypotheses or summaries.

---

## Why Graph RAG for fraud detection?

- Retrieval from graphs returns precise, relationship-rich context (e.g., shared devices, transaction paths, communities).
- The generator can turn that structured context into actionable narrative: "User X shares device Y with 3 known fraudsters".
- Benefits:
  - Better recall on multi-hop fraud rings
  - Explainability: generated summaries give investigators a clear story
  - Hybrid: combine deterministic graph signals with probabilistic LLM reasoning

---

## Key graph signals we use

- Shared devices / resources
- Transaction paths between users
- Community detection (Louvain) to find rings
- Centrality / PageRank to find influential nodes
- Temporal patterns (burstiness of transactions)

---

## High-level architecture

Graph RAG system components:

- Data: transactions, users, devices (CSV, DVC)
- Persistence: Neo4j (canonical graph store)
- In-memory graphs: NetworkX for fast analytics
- Retriever: Cypher / NetworkX queries to extract subgraph context
- Generator: LLM or templating engine to render explanations
- MLflow: experiment tracking for training & evaluation
- Monitoring: Prometheus + Grafana for health and metrics

Visual:

> [Client] -> [API (FastAPI)] -> {Neo4j <-> NetworkX} -> [ML models / LLMs] -> [MLflow, Outputs]

---

## Example RAG flow (single query)

1. Investigator or automated system asks: "Why is user U flagged?"
2. Retriever runs graph queries:
   - immediate neighbors, shared devices, 2-hop transaction paths, community members
3. The retrieved subgraph + metrics are serialized as context
4. Generator (LLM or template) produces a concise explanation and suggested actions

---

## Demo results (what we observed)

- Precision: ~0.88, Recall: ~1.00, F1: ~0.94 (on synthetic dataset used in class)
- High recall on ring detection when combining community signals + shared-device features
- Generated explanations improved analyst triage speed in a small user study (qualitative)

---

## Risk score distribution

Below is the distribution of risk scores produced by the model for a recent run. The histogram shows most users have low scores while a small tail contains high-risk users.

![](./images/risk_hist.png)

---

## Highest-risk users (top 10)

The bar chart shows the top 10 users by predicted risk score — these are the users we'd prioritize for triage.

![](./images/top_users.png)

---

## Device sharing: signals of risk

Devices reused by multiple users are strong signals for collusion or shared accounts. The chart below lists the devices connected to the most distinct users in the dataset.

![](./images/device_sharing.png)


---

## Reproducibility & how students can run it

1. Clone the repo and follow `docs/REPRODUCE.md`.
2. Start the stack with Docker Compose (Neo4j, MLflow, API, Prometheus, Grafana).
3. Run training and batch scoring via the API container (we provide scripts + CI steps).
4. Explore the MLflow runs and outputs under `outputs/`.

Commands (local):

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
uv run python scripts/check_system_health.py
docker compose run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://fraud-mlflow:5000 graph-rag-api uv run python scripts/train_fraud_detector.py
docker compose run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://fraud-mlflow:5000 graph-rag-api uv run python scripts/batch_scoring.py
```

---

## Discussion points for class

- Trade-offs: LLM cost vs value of explanations
- When to prefer deterministic graph rules vs generator outputs
- Data freshness and scale: how to keep the retriever fast for large graphs
- Evaluation: offline metrics vs investigator throughput

---

## References & further reading

- Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) papers
- Graph-based fraud detection literature (community detection, link prediction)
- Neo4j and NetworkX docs
- Our repo: README + `docs/REPRODUCE.md`

---

## Thank you

Questions? — We can run a short demo live and inspect an MLflow run / generated explanation.

Commit message:

docs: add graph visualizations and generator script; embed images in MARP slides

docs/graph_rag_presentation.md, after:

---
marp: true
theme: default
paginate: true
class: lead
backgroundColor: '#ffffff'
---

# Fraud Detection: Business Problem & Graph RAG Technical Solution

_A short presentation for students — business context, architecture, and why we used a Graph-based RAG approach._

---

## Agenda

- Business problem: payments fraud at scale
- Challenges with traditional ML approaches
- Why a graph + RAG architecture?
- System architecture (components)
- Demo & results (what we measured)
- How to reproduce / run locally
- Discussion and references

---

## Business problem

- Large-scale transaction systems see fraudulent rings, collusion and shared devices.
- Fraud is multi-relational: users, devices, transactions, accounts, locations.
- Stakes: monetary loss, regulatory risk, customer trust.
- Requirements:
  - High recall on fraud rings
  - Interpretable signals for investigations
  - Fast inference for operational scoring and batch analysis

---

## Why standard ML alone is insufficient

- Tabular models capture per-entity features but often miss relations (device reuse, rings).
- Graph structure captures relational signals (shared devices, common neighbors, communities).
- Pure graph algorithms (community detection, centrality) are powerful but limited for natural language context and ad-hoc reasoning.

---

## What is RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation)?

- RAG combines a retriever (finds relevant facts) with a generator (answers/augments using those facts).
- In our context:
  - Retriever: graph queries that return relevant subgraphs or neighbor context for an entity/transaction.
  - Generator: an LLM (or rules engine) that consumes the retrieved graph context to produce human-friendly explanations, hypotheses or summaries.

---

## Why Graph RAG for fraud detection?

- Retrieval from graphs returns precise, relationship-rich context (e.g., shared devices, transaction paths, communities).
- The generator can turn that structured context into actionable narrative: "User X shares device Y with 3 known fraudsters".
- Benefits:
  - Better recall on multi-hop fraud rings
  - Explainability: generated summaries give investigators a clear story
  - Hybrid: combine deterministic graph signals with probabilistic LLM reasoning

---

## Key graph signals we use

- Shared devices / resources
- Transaction paths between users
- Community detection (Louvain) to find rings
- Centrality / PageRank to find influential nodes
- Temporal patterns (burstiness of transactions)

---

## High-level architecture

Graph RAG system components:

- Data: transactions, users, devices (CSV, DVC)
- Persistence: Neo4j (canonical graph store)
- In-memory graphs: NetworkX for fast analytics
- Retriever: Cypher / NetworkX queries to extract subgraph context
- Generator: LLM or templating engine to render explanations
- MLflow: experiment tracking for training & evaluation
- Monitoring: Prometheus + Grafana for health and metrics

Visual:

> [Client] -> [API (FastAPI)] -> {Neo4j <-> NetworkX} -> [ML models / LLMs] -> [MLflow, Outputs]

---

## Example RAG flow (single query)

1. Investigator or automated system asks: "Why is user U flagged?"
2. Retriever runs graph queries:
   - immediate neighbors, shared devices, 2-hop transaction paths, community members
3. The retrieved subgraph + metrics are serialized as context
4. Generator (LLM or template) produces a concise explanation and suggested actions

---

## Demo results (what we observed)

- Precision: ~0.88, Recall: ~1.00, F1: ~0.94 (on synthetic dataset used in class)
- High recall on ring detection when combining community signals + shared-device features
- Generated explanations improved analyst triage speed in a small user study (qualitative)

---

## Risk score distribution

Below is the distribution of risk scores produced by the model for a recent run. The histogram shows most users have low scores while a small tail contains high-risk users.

![](./images/risk_hist.png)

---

## Highest-risk users (top 10)

The bar chart shows the top 10 users by predicted risk score — these are the users we'd prioritize for triage.

![](./images/top_users.png)

---

## Device sharing: signals of risk

Devices reused by multiple users are strong signals for collusion or shared accounts. The chart below lists the devices connected to the most distinct users in the dataset.

![](./images/device_sharing.png)

---

## Graph visualizations (overview)

Below is a visual overview of the graph we build from users, devices and transactions. Nodes are users (blue) and devices (green); edges show device associations and transactions.

![](./images/graph_overview.png)

---

## Graph communities

We run community detection on the user graph and color users by community — this helps surface rings and colluding groups.

![](./images/graph_communities.png)

---

## Transaction neighborhood for a high-risk user

When a user scores highly, we retrieve their transaction neighborhood and present it to investigators as contextual evidence.

![](./images/transaction_path.png)

---

## Reproducibility & how students can run it

1. Clone the repo and follow `docs/REPRODUCE.md`.
2. Start the stack with Docker Compose (Neo4j, MLflow, API, Prometheus, Grafana).
3. Run training and batch scoring via the API container (we provide scripts + CI steps).
4. Explore the MLflow runs and outputs under `outputs/`.

Commands (local):

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
uv run python scripts/check_system_health.py
docker compose run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://fraud-mlflow:5000 graph-rag-api uv run python scripts/train_fraud_detector.py
docker compose run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://fraud-mlflow:5000 graph-rag-api uv run python scripts/batch_scoring.py
```

---

## Discussion points for class

- Trade-offs: LLM cost vs value of explanations
- When to prefer deterministic graph rules vs generator outputs
- Data freshness and scale: how to keep the retriever fast for large graphs
- Evaluation: offline metrics vs investigator throughput

---

## References & further reading

- Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) papers
- Graph-based fraud detection literature (community detection, link prediction)
- Neo4j and NetworkX docs
- Our repo: README + `docs/REPRODUCE.md`

---

## Thank you

Questions? — We can run a short demo live and inspect an MLflow run / generated explanation.
